Title:

A COMPLEX-VALUED DEEP LEARNING ANSATZ WITH APPLICATION TO VIBRATION SIGNAL CLASSIFICATION



Abstract:


At present, the vast majority of building blocks, techniques, and architectures for
deep learning are based on real-valued operations and representations. However,
recent work carried on by the most disparate areas and older fundamental theoretical 
analysis suggests that complex numbers could have a richer representational capacity.
Many deterministic signals in fact, such as seismic, electrical or vibrational signals, 
contain significant information in the phase structure of the signal, that risk of being lost
when studied usign a real-valued model.
However, despite their attractive properties and potential, complex-valued deep neural 
networks have been mostly marginalized due to the absence of the building blocks required 
to design such models. 
The lack of order over the complex field raises several difficulties both in the definition and in 
the training of the network, for which we will propose and formalize a possible extent of
the main operations implemented in real-valued machine learning.
We will address also the problem of defining reasonable activation functions in the complex domain, satisfying all the 
requirements of nonlinearity, flexibility and consistency. Limited literature exists, in fact, under this perspective, 
with all the actual approaches generally developed in a split fashion, also because of the Liouville's theorem, that
impose further limitations without counterparts in the real case.
Finally, we will implement the develop ansatz over a multiclass classification problem over a dataset of
vibration signals, provided by the group Bonfiglioli S.P.A., with the objective of building a prediction
model able to proactively prevent failures that may occur in one of their engines.
This will be possible also thanks to JAX, a recently developed library from Google DeepMind dedicated 
to high-performance numerical computing and machine learning, that partially compensate the lack of support for complex numbers by 
hardware acceleration. 




 non endowed with sufficient degrees of freedom to adapt their shape given the
training data. While this problem has received considerable attention in the real case, a very limited literature exists for CVNNs,
where most activation functions are generally developed in a split fashion (i.e., by considering the real and imaginary parts
of the activation separately) or with simple phase-amplitude techniques.

...nonlinear activation function (AF) cannot be both analytic and bounded everywhere in the complex plane .

In recent years CNNs have outperformed traditional
approaches in many computer vision tasks such as object detection, image classification
and face recognition. CNNs are vulnerable to overfitting, and a lot of research focuses
on finding regularization methods to overcome it. One approach is designing task specific
models based on prior knowledge. Several works have shown that properties of natural images can be easily captured using
complex numbers. Motivated by these works, we present a variation of the CNN model with
complex valued input and weights. We construct the complex model as a generalization of
the real model. Lack of order over the complex field raises several difficulties both in the
definition and in the training of the network. We address these issues and suggest possible
solutions. ... although the complex model is hard to
train, it is significantly less vulnerable to overfitting. We also demonstrate that the complex
network detects meaningful phase structure in the data.

While it has been shown that
phase content can be restored in deep neural networks, we show how including
phase information in feature maps improves both training and inference from
deterministic physical data. Furthermore, we show that the reduction of parameters
in a complex network outperforms larger real-valued networks.
